README.md, before:

# ARC Reasoning Labeler

# ISAS NOTES

Hi Niko! Thanks for annotating my data. this should take 2ish hours, let me know if it takes longer. I recommend looking at the puzzles themselves first (the visuals), figuring out the trick, (there are 2-3 training examples, then a test input which the puzzle-solver must predict the output for. So try to guess what "rule" or steps take you from input to output on all examples, then read the steps (some of them are formatted weirdly, or are very technical so they take some close reading.) If the models generated steps (seen by clicking one of the puzzlles on the left and scrolling down) are consistent with the trick you originally identified mark as correct. If there are any small mistakes (e.g. it says red square in the top left corner when its right) mark as incorrect, also mark as incorrect if the reasoning is flawed. There are a few failure modes to label and more information about each is in the dedicated readme. Also, for "bbox misalignment" i disabled showing inbetween steps since sometimes there can be too many, so assume when there are too many steps or not enough steps that it was also this failure mode. You can check off multiple. I know this might seem overwhelming, but once you get in the rhythm its way more clear. Thanks again!

IMPORTANT NOTE:
if the general steps only has one step skip it. It was a technical error. Also you can click arrows to see multiple versions of the steps if the first one is formatted poorly. 

---

A Flask-based web application for labeling the correctness of reasoning steps in ARC puzzle solutions. This tool allows human annotators to review puzzle-solving steps and label them as correct, incorrect, or skipped.

## Features

- **Visual Puzzle Display**: View training and test examples with side-by-side input/output grids
- **Step-by-Step Review**: Examine generated reasoning steps with detailed instructions
- **Interactive Labeling**: Large, easy-to-click buttons for labeling (✓ Correct, ✗ Incorrect, ⏭ Skip)
- **Failure Mode Tracking**: Select specific failure modes (A1-A3, B1-B2, C1-C3) for incorrect reasoning
- **Progress Tracking**: Real-time statistics showing labeling progress
- **Duplicate Version Navigation**: Handle multiple analysis files for the same puzzle
- **Auto-save**: Labels are automatically saved to JSON files

## Documentation

- **[README.md](README.md)** - This file: Setup and usage instructions
- **[FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md](FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md)** - **Detailed guide on identifying failure modes** - Read this before labeling!
- **[SETUP_INSTRUCTIONS.md](SETUP_INSTRUCTIONS.md)** - Quick setup guide for second annotator

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8 or higher
- pip (Python package manager)

### Installation

1. **Clone or download this repository**

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended):**
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   ```

3. **Activate the virtual environment:**
   
   **Windows (PowerShell):**
   ```powershell
   .\venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
   ```
   
   **Windows (Command Prompt):**
   ```cmd
   venv\Scripts\activate.bat
   ```
   
   **Linux/Mac:**
   ```bash
   source venv/bin/activate
   ```

4. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## Directory Structure

```
reasoning_labeler_repo/
├── app.py                          # Main Flask application
├── arc_visualizer.py               # Grid visualization utilities
├── requirements.txt                # Python dependencies
├── README.md                       # This file
├── templates/
│   └── reasoning_labeler.html      # Web interface template
├── traces/                         # Puzzle analysis files directory
│   └── (your puzzle JSON files go here)
└── labels/                         # Label storage directory (auto-created)
    └── .reasoning_labels.json      # Labels file (auto-created)
```

## Usage

### 1. Run the Application

**Windows:**
```bash
python app.py
```

**Linux/Mac:**
```bash
python3 app.py
```

The app will start on `http://localhost:5001`

### 2. Open in Browser

Navigate to `http://localhost:5001` in your web browser.

## How to Label Puzzles

1. **Select a Puzzle**: Click on a puzzle from the left sidebar, or the app will automatically load the next unlabeled puzzle.

2. **Review the Puzzle**:
   - View training examples (input → expected output → prediction)
   - View test examples (input → expected output → generated output)
   - Read through the generated reasoning steps

3. **Label the Puzzle**:
   - Click **✓** (green checkmark) if the reasoning is correct
   - Click **✗** (red X) if the reasoning is incorrect
   - Click **⏭ Skip** if there's not enough information to make a judgment

4. **Select Failure Modes** (for incorrect reasoning):
   - **Category A**: Accuracy failures (A1: Complete failure, A2: Partial failure, A3: Training failure)
   - **Category B**: Step count issues (B1: Too many steps, B2: Too few steps)
   - **Category C**: Visual fidelity issues (C1: Grid mismatch, C2: Bbox misalignment, C3: Description mismatch)
   - You can select multiple failure modes
   - **See [FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md](FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md) for detailed explanations and examples**

5. **Add Notes** (optional): Enter reasoning notes in the text area

6. **Submit**: Click "Submit & Move to Next Puzzle" to save and move to the next unlabeled puzzle

## Label Storage

Labels are saved to `labels/.reasoning_labels.json` in the following format:

```json
{
  "puzzle_id": {
    "label": "correct" | "incorrect" | "skipped",
    "reasoning": "Optional notes...",
    "failure_modes": ["B1", "C2"],
    "file_path": "path/to/file.json",
    "timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00",
    "reviewer": "human",
    "edited": false
  }
}
```

## Sending Labels to Another Annotator

After completing your labeling session:

1. **Copy the labels file:**
   ```bash
   # The labels file is at:
   labels/.reasoning_labels.json
   ```

2. **Send the labels file** to ISA (via email, shared drive, etc.)

3. **The other annotator should:**
   - Place the labels file in their `labels/` directory
   - Do some research with it
   - Labels will merge automatically (existing labels won't be overwritten unless edited)

## Statistics

The stats bar at the top shows:
- **Total Puzzles**: All puzzles found in traces directory
- **Labeled**: Number of puzzles with labels
- **Correct**: Number labeled as correct
- **Incorrect**: Number labeled as incorrect
- **Skipped**: Number skipped
- **Completion**: Percentage of puzzles labeled

## Troubleshooting

### Port Already in Use

If port 5001 is already in use, edit `app.py` and change:
```python
app.run(debug=True, host='0.0.0.0', port=5001)
```
to a different port (e.g., `port=5002`)

### No Puzzles Found

- Check that puzzle JSON files are in the `traces/` directory
- Ensure files match the expected naming pattern (`*_analysis.json`)
- Verify JSON files contain `general_steps` field

### Labels Not Saving

- Check that the `labels/` directory exists and is writable
- Check file permissions
- Look for error messages in the terminal

### Cache Issues

If puzzles aren't showing up after adding new files:
- Delete `traces/.puzzle_metadata_cache.json` to force a cache rebuild
- Restart the application

## API Endpoints

- `GET /` - Main labeling interface
- `GET /api/puzzles` - List all puzzles with labels
- `GET /api/puzzles/unlabeled` - Get unlabeled puzzles (paginated)
- `GET /api/puzzle/<file_path>` - Get puzzle data
- `POST /api/label` - Save/update label
- `DELETE /api/label/<puzzle_id>` - Delete label
- `GET /api/stats` - Get labeling statistics

## Keyboard Shortcuts

- Use the sidebar to navigate between puzzles
- Click puzzle items to load them
- Use the large buttons (✓, ✗, ⏭) for quick labeling

## Notes for Second Annotator

1. **Before starting:**
   - **📖 Read [FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md](FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md) first!** This explains how to identify each failure mode with examples
   - Make sure you have the latest puzzle files in `traces/`
   - If you received labels from another annotator, place `reasoning_labels.json` in the `labels/` directory

2. **During labeling:**
   - The app will automatically load unlabeled puzzles
   - You can see which puzzles are already labeled in the sidebar
   - Labels are saved automatically when you click the label buttons
   - **Keep [FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md](FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md) open** as a reference when selecting failure modes

3. **After completing:**
   - Send the `labels/.reasoning_labels.json` file back
   - Include any notes about edge cases or questions

## Support

For issues or questions:
1. Check the troubleshooting section above
2. Review the error messages in the terminal
3. Ensure all dependencies are installed correctly

## License

This tool is provided as-is for ARC puzzle reasoning analysis.

Commit message:

Update README with failure mode details and notes
Clarify failure modes and usage instructions in README.

README.md, after:

# ARC Reasoning Labeler

# ISAS NOTES

Hi Niko! Thanks for annotating my data. this should take 2ish hours, let me know if it takes longer. I recommend looking at the puzzles themselves first (the visuals), figuring out the trick, (there are 2-3 training examples, then a test input which the puzzle-solver must predict the output for. So try to guess what "rule" or steps take you from input to output on all examples, then read the steps (some of them are formatted weirdly, or are very technical so they take some close reading.) If the models generated steps (seen by clicking one of the puzzlles on the left and scrolling down) are consistent with the trick you originally identified mark as correct. If there are any small mistakes (e.g. it says red square in the top left corner when its right) mark as incorrect, also mark as incorrect if the reasoning is flawed. There are a few failure modes to label and more information about each is in the dedicated readme. Also, for "bbox misalignment" i disabled showing inbetween steps since sometimes there can be too many, so assume when there are too many steps or not enough steps that it was also this failure mode. You can check off multiple. I know this might seem overwhelming, but once you get in the rhythm its way more clear. Thanks again!

IMPORTANT NOTE:
if the general steps only has one step skip it. It was a technical error. Also you can click arrows to see multiple versions of the steps if the first one is formatted poorly. 

Also btw failure mode c1 is when the text doesnt describe the grid correctly, and the c3 is when the text was correct but the grid wasnt. You can more details in the readmes. Theres also quickstart files but make sure you make a venv first.

---

A Flask-based web application for labeling the correctness of reasoning steps in ARC puzzle solutions. This tool allows human annotators to review puzzle-solving steps and label them as correct, incorrect, or skipped.

## Features

- **Visual Puzzle Display**: View training and test examples with side-by-side input/output grids
- **Step-by-Step Review**: Examine generated reasoning steps with detailed instructions
- **Interactive Labeling**: Large, easy-to-click buttons for labeling (✓ Correct, ✗ Incorrect, ⏭ Skip)
- **Failure Mode Tracking**: Select specific failure modes (A1-A3, B1-B2, C1-C3) for incorrect reasoning
- **Progress Tracking**: Real-time statistics showing labeling progress
- **Duplicate Version Navigation**: Handle multiple analysis files for the same puzzle
- **Auto-save**: Labels are automatically saved to JSON files

## Documentation

- **[README.md](README.md)** - This file: Setup and usage instructions
- **[FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md](FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md)** - **Detailed guide on identifying failure modes** - Read this before labeling!
- **[SETUP_INSTRUCTIONS.md](SETUP_INSTRUCTIONS.md)** - Quick setup guide for second annotator

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8 or higher
- pip (Python package manager)

### Installation

1. **Clone or download this repository**

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended):**
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   ```

3. **Activate the virtual environment:**
   
   **Windows (PowerShell):**
   ```powershell
   .\venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
   ```
   
   **Windows (Command Prompt):**
   ```cmd
   venv\Scripts\activate.bat
   ```
   
   **Linux/Mac:**
   ```bash
   source venv/bin/activate
   ```

4. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## Directory Structure

```
reasoning_labeler_repo/
├── app.py                          # Main Flask application
├── arc_visualizer.py               # Grid visualization utilities
├── requirements.txt                # Python dependencies
├── README.md                       # This file
├── templates/
│   └── reasoning_labeler.html      # Web interface template
├── traces/                         # Puzzle analysis files directory
│   └── (your puzzle JSON files go here)
└── labels/                         # Label storage directory (auto-created)
    └── .reasoning_labels.json      # Labels file (auto-created)
```

## Usage

### 1. Run the Application

**Windows:**
```bash
python app.py
```

**Linux/Mac:**
```bash
python3 app.py
```

The app will start on `http://localhost:5001`

### 2. Open in Browser

Navigate to `http://localhost:5001` in your web browser.

## How to Label Puzzles

1. **Select a Puzzle**: Click on a puzzle from the left sidebar, or the app will automatically load the next unlabeled puzzle.

2. **Review the Puzzle**:
   - View training examples (input → expected output → prediction)
   - View test examples (input → expected output → generated output)
   - Read through the generated reasoning steps

3. **Label the Puzzle**:
   - Click **✓** (green checkmark) if the reasoning is correct
   - Click **✗** (red X) if the reasoning is incorrect
   - Click **⏭ Skip** if there's not enough information to make a judgment

4. **Select Failure Modes** (for incorrect reasoning):
   - **Category A**: Accuracy failures (A1: Complete failure, A2: Partial failure, A3: Training failure)
   - **Category B**: Step count issues (B1: Too many steps, B2: Too few steps)
   - **Category C**: Visual fidelity issues (C1: Grid mismatch, C2: Bbox misalignment, C3: Description mismatch)
   - You can select multiple failure modes
   - **See [FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md](FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md) for detailed explanations and examples**

5. **Add Notes** (optional): Enter reasoning notes in the text area

6. **Submit**: Click "Submit & Move to Next Puzzle" to save and move to the next unlabeled puzzle

## Label Storage

Labels are saved to `labels/.reasoning_labels.json` in the following format:

```json
{
  "puzzle_id": {
    "label": "correct" | "incorrect" | "skipped",
    "reasoning": "Optional notes...",
    "failure_modes": ["B1", "C2"],
    "file_path": "path/to/file.json",
    "timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00",
    "reviewer": "human",
    "edited": false
  }
}
```

## Sending Labels to Another Annotator

After completing your labeling session:

1. **Copy the labels file:**
   ```bash
   # The labels file is at:
   labels/.reasoning_labels.json
   ```

2. **Send the labels file** to ISA (via email, shared drive, etc.)

3. **The other annotator should:**
   - Place the labels file in their `labels/` directory
   - Do some research with it
   - Labels will merge automatically (existing labels won't be overwritten unless edited)

## Statistics

The stats bar at the top shows:
- **Total Puzzles**: All puzzles found in traces directory
- **Labeled**: Number of puzzles with labels
- **Correct**: Number labeled as correct
- **Incorrect**: Number labeled as incorrect
- **Skipped**: Number skipped
- **Completion**: Percentage of puzzles labeled

## Troubleshooting

### Port Already in Use

If port 5001 is already in use, edit `app.py` and change:
```python
app.run(debug=True, host='0.0.0.0', port=5001)
```
to a different port (e.g., `port=5002`)

### No Puzzles Found

- Check that puzzle JSON files are in the `traces/` directory
- Ensure files match the expected naming pattern (`*_analysis.json`)
- Verify JSON files contain `general_steps` field

### Labels Not Saving

- Check that the `labels/` directory exists and is writable
- Check file permissions
- Look for error messages in the terminal

### Cache Issues

If puzzles aren't showing up after adding new files:
- Delete `traces/.puzzle_metadata_cache.json` to force a cache rebuild
- Restart the application

## API Endpoints

- `GET /` - Main labeling interface
- `GET /api/puzzles` - List all puzzles with labels
- `GET /api/puzzles/unlabeled` - Get unlabeled puzzles (paginated)
- `GET /api/puzzle/<file_path>` - Get puzzle data
- `POST /api/label` - Save/update label
- `DELETE /api/label/<puzzle_id>` - Delete label
- `GET /api/stats` - Get labeling statistics

## Keyboard Shortcuts

- Use the sidebar to navigate between puzzles
- Click puzzle items to load them
- Use the large buttons (✓, ✗, ⏭) for quick labeling

## Notes for Second Annotator

1. **Before starting:**
   - **📖 Read [FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md](FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md) first!** This explains how to identify each failure mode with examples
   - Make sure you have the latest puzzle files in `traces/`
   - If you received labels from another annotator, place `reasoning_labels.json` in the `labels/` directory

2. **During labeling:**
   - The app will automatically load unlabeled puzzles
   - You can see which puzzles are already labeled in the sidebar
   - Labels are saved automatically when you click the label buttons
   - **Keep [FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md](FAILURE_MODE_GUIDE.md) open** as a reference when selecting failure modes

3. **After completing:**
   - Send the `labels/.reasoning_labels.json` file back
   - Include any notes about edge cases or questions

## Support

For issues or questions:
1. Check the troubleshooting section above
2. Review the error messages in the terminal
3. Ensure all dependencies are installed correctly

## License

This tool is provided as-is for ARC puzzle reasoning analysis.
