SETUP_INSTRUCTIONS.md, before:

# Setup Instructions for Second Annotator

## Quick Start

1. **Download/Clone this repository**

2. **Run the setup script:**
   
   **Windows:**
   ```bash
   start_app.bat
   ```
   
   **Linux/Mac:**
   ```bash
   chmod +x start_app.sh
   ./start_app.sh
   ```

3. **Place puzzle files:**
   - Put your puzzle analysis JSON files in the `traces/` directory
   - Files should match pattern: `*_analysis.json` or `*_v11_analysis.json`

4. **If you received labels from another annotator:**
   - Copy the `reasoning_labels.json` file to `labels/.reasoning_labels.json`
   - Your labels will merge with existing ones

5. **Open browser:**
   - Navigate to `http://localhost:5001`
   - Start labeling!

## Manual Setup (if scripts don't work)

1. **Create virtual environment:**
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   ```

2. **Activate virtual environment:**
   
   Windows:
   ```bash
   venv\Scripts\activate
   ```
   
   Linux/Mac:
   ```bash
   source venv/bin/activate
   ```

3. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Run the app:**
   ```bash
   python app.py
   ```

## Directory Structure

```
reasoning_labeler_repo/
├── app.py                    # Main application
├── arc_visualizer.py         # Visualization utilities
├── requirements.txt          # Dependencies
├── README.md                 # Full documentation
├── templates/                # Web interface
│   └── reasoning_labeler.html
├── traces/                   # PUT YOUR PUZZLE FILES HERE
│   └── (puzzle JSON files)
└── labels/                   # Labels storage (auto-created)
    └── .reasoning_labels.json
```

## Sending Labels Back

After completing your labeling session:

1. **Find the labels file:**
   - Location: `labels/.reasoning_labels.json`

2. **Send this file** to the main annotator

3. **The file contains all your labels** in JSON format

## Troubleshooting

- **Port 5001 in use?** Edit `app.py` and change `port=5001` to a different port
- **No puzzles showing?** Check that files are in `traces/` and match `*_analysis.json` pattern
- **Import errors?** Make sure you activated the virtual environment and installed requirements

Commit message:

Add ISAS NOTES section at top of documentation for Niko

SETUP_INSTRUCTIONS.md, after:

# Setup Instructions for Second Annotator

# ISAS NOTES

Hi Niko! Thanks for annotating my data. this should take 2ish hours, let me know if it takes longer. I recommend looking at the puzzles themselves first (the visuals), figuring out the trick, (there are 2-3 training examples, then a test input which the puzzle-solver must predict the output for. So try to guess what "rule" or steps take you from input to output on all examples, then read the steps (some of them are formatted weirdly, or are very technical so they take some close reading.) If the models generated steps (seen by clicking one of the puzzlles on the left and scrolling down) are consistent with the trick you originally identified. If there are any small mistakes (e.g. it says red square in the top left corner when its right) mark as incorrect. There are a few failure modes to label and more information about each is in the dedicated readme. Also, for "bbox misalignment" i disabled showing inbetween steps since sometimes there can be too many, so assume when there are too many steps or not enough steps that it was also this failure mode. You can check off multiple. I know this might seem overwhelming, but once you get in the rhythm its way more clear. Thanks again!

---

## Quick Start

1. **Download/Clone this repository**

2. **Run the setup script:**
   
   **Windows:**
   ```bash
   start_app.bat
   ```
   
   **Linux/Mac:**
   ```bash
   chmod +x start_app.sh
   ./start_app.sh
   ```

3. **Place puzzle files:**
   - Put your puzzle analysis JSON files in the `traces/` directory
   - Files should match pattern: `*_analysis.json` or `*_v11_analysis.json`

4. **If you received labels from another annotator:**
   - Copy the `reasoning_labels.json` file to `labels/.reasoning_labels.json`
   - Your labels will merge with existing ones

5. **Open browser:**
   - Navigate to `http://localhost:5001`
   - Start labeling!

## Manual Setup (if scripts don't work)

1. **Create virtual environment:**
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   ```

2. **Activate virtual environment:**
   
   Windows:
   ```bash
   venv\Scripts\activate
   ```
   
   Linux/Mac:
   ```bash
   source venv/bin/activate
   ```

3. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Run the app:**
   ```bash
   python app.py
   ```

## Directory Structure

```
reasoning_labeler_repo/
├── app.py                    # Main application
├── arc_visualizer.py         # Visualization utilities
├── requirements.txt          # Dependencies
├── README.md                 # Full documentation
├── templates/                # Web interface
│   └── reasoning_labeler.html
├── traces/                   # PUT YOUR PUZZLE FILES HERE
│   └── (puzzle JSON files)
└── labels/                   # Labels storage (auto-created)
    └── .reasoning_labels.json
```

## Sending Labels Back

After completing your labeling session:

1. **Find the labels file:**
   - Location: `labels/.reasoning_labels.json`

2. **Send this file** to the main annotator

3. **The file contains all your labels** in JSON format

## Troubleshooting

- **Port 5001 in use?** Edit `app.py` and change `port=5001` to a different port
- **No puzzles showing?** Check that files are in `traces/` and match `*_analysis.json` pattern
- **Import errors?** Make sure you activated the virtual environment and installed requirements
